Source: SSM Health (SLUCare / Saint Louis University School of Medicine) — The Anti-Inflammatory and Elimination Diet for Adults Living with Endometriosis
URL: https://www.ssmhealth.com/SSMHealth/media/Documents/slucare/services/obstetrics-gynecology-womens-health/endometriosis-diet-booklet.pdf

1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Anti-
Inflammatory and 
Elimination Diet for 
Adults Living with 
Endometriosis  
 
Saint Louis University School of Medicine 
Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Women’s Health 
Center for Endometriosis 
www.endometriosis-excision.com 
www.slucare.edu/fertility 
 
 
Patrick Yeung, Jr. MD 
Rose Catanzaro MS, RDN, LDN 
1031 Bellevue Ave, Suite 400 
St. Louis, MO 63117 
314-977-7455 
2 
 
Table of Contents 
 
Overview of Endometriosis …..3-4 
 
What should your diet be composed of? ......5 
 
Breakdown of Food Groups……6-8 
 
Organic or not? ……9 
 
Hidden hormones in Your Food …..10 
 
Which Fats are the Most Anti-inflammatory? …..11 
 
Omegas by the Mouth…..12 
 
Omega-3 Supplementation …..13 
 
Elimination Diet and Endometriosis …..14 
 
Implementing the Endo Elimination Diet …..15-16 
 
Dairy Foods …..17 
 
Gluten Foods …18-21 
 
Added Sugars …22 
 
The Basics of a Healthy Well Balanced Diet …25 
 
References …26-27 
 
Food Intake Log and Symptom Diary …28 
 
3 
 
Overview of Endometriosis 
 
Endometriosis is a painful, chronic disease where tissue that normally 
lines the uterus grows outside of the uterus. Such areas of growth 
include the abdomen on the ovaries and fallopian tube as well as the 
bladder, bowel, vagina, cervix, and the area between the vagina and 
rectum. The misplaced tissue builds up, breaks down, and sheds like the 
tissue that lines the uterus during menstrual cycles. However, the 
misplaced tissue has no way of exiting the body which results in internal 
bleeding, inflammation, bowel problems, infertility, scar tissue 
formation, and adhesions.  
 
Symptoms 
 
 Infertility 
 Fatigue 
 Painful urination before periods 
 Painful bowel movements during 
periods  
 Pain with sex 
 Pain before and during periods 
due to severe cramping, heavy menstrual flow, and periods 
lasting > 7 days  
 Diarrhea 
 Constipation 
 Nausea  
 
Prevalence 
 
About 1 in 10 women in the U.S. have endometriosis. About 176 million 
women worldwide have endometriosis. Symptoms usually occur during 
reproductive age (12-60 years old) but most women are often 
undiagnosed. 
  
Source: endofound.org 
4 
 
Overview of Endometriosis 
 
Causes 
 
There is no identified cause for endometriosis. Theories related to 
genetics suggest that it may be carried in genes so some families may be 
more predisposed to it than others. Another theory has found it to be 
present at fetal development and activated during puberty. A retrograde 
menstruation theory suggests that menstrual tissue can back up into the 
fallopian tube, implant in the abdomen, and grow which can lead to the 
development of endometriosis. Lastly, there has been a link between the 
body’s inflammatory response and endometriosis but the mechanism 
behind this theory is not well understood.  
 
 
 
Treatment 
 
To confirm diagnosis, a laparoscopy is performed which will show the 
location, size, and extent of the growths. The gold standard for 
treatment is laparoscopic excision surgery to remove the growths. 
However, there is no cure for endometriosis.  
 
Source: endometriosisassn.org 
5 
 
What should your diet be composed of? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vegetables  
4-5 svg/day  
Fruits  
1-2 
svg/day 
Healthy cold-pressed 
oils (Extra virgin, 
canola flaxseed, nut-
based oils),  
2-4 svg/day 
 
Fish, 
seafood  
3-5 
svg/week 
Lean meat, 
poultry, eggs 
3-5 svg/week 
Beans, 
legumes 
2-4 
svg/week 
Red meat 
1-2 
svg/week 
Nuts and 
seeds 
1-2 svg/ 
day 
Whole grains 
(Gluten-free if 
necessary) 
3-5 svg/day 
Low-fat Dairy 
(Dairy-free if 
necessary) 
3 svg/day 
Alcohol, 
caffeine & 
sweets 
1-2 svg/week 
 
 
6 
 
Vegetables:  
 How much? 4-5 servings per day minimum (one serving = 2 cups salad 
greens, ½ cup vegetables cooked) 
 Healthy Sources: Dark leafy greens (spinach, collard greens, kale, 
Swiss card), cruciferous vegetables (broccoli, cabbage, Brussels 
sprouts, bok choy, cauliflower), carrots, beets, onion, peas, squashes, 
washed raw salad greens 
 Why? Vegetables are rich in flavonoids and carotenoids with 
antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. Aim for a plate that’s 
colorful in vegetables to get a wide variety of vitamins, including A, E, 
and C as studies have shown these vitamins to be lower in 
endometriosis patients.  
 
Fruits: 
 How much? 1-2 servings per day (one serving = 1 medium size piece 
of fruit, ½ cup chopped fruit, ¼ cup dried fruit) 
 Healthy Sources: Raspberries, blueberries, strawberries, peaches, 
nectarines, oranges, pink grapefruit, red grapes, plums, pomegranates, 
blackberries, cherries, apples, and pears all have lower glycemic index.  
 Why? Fruits are rich in flavonoids and carotenoids with antioxidant 
and anti-inflammatory properties. Aim for variety in color to get a wide 
variety of nutrients, including A, E, and C.  
When possible, choose organic for reduced pesticide residue that have 
been associated with hormone imbalances.  
 
Fish and Seafood 
 How much? 3-5 servings per week (one serving = 4 oz. of fish or 
seafood) 
 Healthy Sources: Wild Alaskan salmon, herring, sardines, and black 
cod 
 Why? Fish is rich in Omega-3s which are anti-inflammatory. Choose 
higher fat, deep-sea fish as they have greater intakes of Omega-3s.  
 
Lean Meat, Poultry, Eggs 
 How much? 3-5 servings per week (one serving = 3 oz. of poultry or 
skinless meat)  
 Healthy Sources: High quality skinless poultry, turkey, grass-fed lean 
meats, free-range eggs 
 Why? Lean meats are lower in saturated fat to better control 
cholesterol levels.  
 
7 
 
Beans and Legumes 
 How much? 2-4 servings per week (one serving = ½ cup cooked beans 
or legumes) 
 Healthy Sources: Black beans, chickpeas, black-eyed peas, and lentils 
 Why? Beans are rich in folic acid, magnesium, and potassium and 
soluble fiber. They are a low-glycemic-load foods to stabilize blood 
sugars.  
 
Red Meat 
 How much? 1-2 servings per week (one serving = 3 oz. of cooked 
meat) 
 Sources: Beef, steak, pork, veal 
 Why? Limit these types of foods as red meats are shown to be pro-
inflammatory and cause hormone imbalances. Choose grass-fed or 
organic meats. 
 
Cold-Pressed Vegetable Oils 
 How much? 2-4 servings a day (one serving= 1 teaspoon of oil) 
 Healthy Sources: Extra virgin olive oil, vegetable oil, canola oil, 
flaxseed oils, nut-based oils 
 Why? Oils are high in Omega-3s and antioxidants which are anti-
inflammatory. They are also rich in monounsaturated fats that raise 
good cholesterol (HDLs) and lower bad cholesterol (LDLs).  
Expelled cold-pressed oil is best since it is not chemically treated and 
heated at lower temperatures to extract the oil. When cooking with oil, 
use lower temperatures as higher temperatures increases the 
production of trans fat.  
 Where to use? Drizzle cold-pressed oils on salads, over vegetables for 
roasting or sautéing, or even popcorn! Mix organic butter with a cold-
pressed oil for a healthier spread. 
 
Nuts and Seeds 
 How much? 1-2 servings a day (one serving = 2 walnuts, 1 
tablespoon of flaxseed, 1 oz. of avocado, 1 tbsp. of peanut butter)  
 Healthy Sources: Almonds, walnuts, ground flaxseed, pecans, hemp 
seeds, avocado, natural peanut butter, chia seeds 
 Why? Nuts and seeds are high in Omega-3s which are anti-
inflammatory. They are excellent sources of B-vitamins in addition to 
phosphorous.  
 
 
8 
 
 
 
Whole Grains 
 How much? 3-5 servings a day (one serving = ½ cup cooked grains) 
 Healthy Sources: Brown rice, basmati rice, wild rice, buckwheat, 
quinoa, steel-cut oats, gluten-free noodles or pasta  
 Why? Whole grains have added B-vitamins with added fiber to 
promote a healthy digestive tract and reduce spikes in blood sugar that 
promote inflammation.  
 
Low-fat Dairy or Dairy Alternatives 
 How much? 3 servings a day (1 ounce of cheese, 8 ounce serving of 
milk/dairy-free milk, 1 cup of yogurt)  
 Healthy Sources: Low-fat cheeses (Swiss, mozzarella, parmesan), fat-
free yogurt, cottage cheese, skim or 1% milk. You can find dairy-free 
options of these foods as healthy dairy alternatives. 
 Why? Vitamin D has been shown to reduce pro-inflammatory 
cytokines that contribute to possible inflammation associated with 
endometriosis. Choose organic dairy products to reduce the amount of 
hormones added to your foods.  
 
Alcohol, Caffeine, Processed Foods, and Sweets 
 How much? 1-2 servings per week, sparingly 
 Sources: Processed foods, fried foods, fast-food, caffeine in sodas or 
sugary sweetened beverages, alcohol 
 Why? These types of foods have no nutritional value and added sugar 
which can prevent other vital nutrients from being absorbed. Caffeine 
and alcohol have been thought to impair ovarian function, aggravate 
PMS symptoms, and negatively affect infertility. Sweets are pro-
inflammatory and should be limited.  
 What to eat instead? Healthier sweet substitutes can include small 
servings of dark chocolate, dried fruit, frozen yogurt, and fruit sorbet. 
 
Water 
 How much? 8-8 oz. glasses of water, half a gallon (64 oz.)  
 Sources: Pure water, or drinks that are mostly water, such as tea or 
sparkling water with lemon. 
 Why? Water is vital for overall proper functioning of the body and 
removes metabolic waste products.  
 
 
9 
 
Organic or not?  
 
Research has shown that pesticides like organochlorines, 
organophosphates, bipyridines have been associated with 
decreased antioxidant capacity of fruits and vegetables. In 
addition, organochlorines have been shown to negatively affect 
hormonal pathways.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VS. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Foods on the “Dirty Dozen” list have the greatest amount of 
pesticides while foods on the “Clean Fifteen” list have the least 
amount. In order to consume a wide variety of fruits and 
vegetables for optimal nutrition, choose organic produce when 
purchasing fruits and vegetables from the Dirty Dozen list to 
reduce pesticide exposure.  

10 
 
Hidden Hormones in Your Food 
 
Dairy and meat products have added hormones that may be linked with 
hormone imbalances in patients with endometriosis. However, the 
nutrients from these foods, such as protein, Vitamin D, calcium, and iron 
are important components of a well-balanced diet.  
 
To reduce the amount of hormones in your foods, choose organic milk 
or dairy-free milk and grass-fed beef.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
What constitutes organic? 
Below are the USDA organic 
regulations: 
Managed without antibiotics, added 
growth hormones, mammalian or 
avian byproducts, or other prohibited 
feed ingredients (e.g., urea, manure, 
or arsenic compounds) 
Livestock that is allowed year-round 
access to the outdoors for grazing 
Raised on certified organic land 
Fed 100% certified organic feed 
Managed in a way that conserves 
natural resources and biodiversity 

11 
 
Which fats are the most anti-inflammatory? 
 
 
 
 
 
Flaxseed has the highest Omega-3 concentration followed by 
canola and soybean oil. 
 
The goal is to consume and use fats that have lower saturated 
fat and a higher Omega-3 to Omega-6 ratio to reduce rates of 
inflammation associated with endometriosis.  
 
 
 
 
 
12 
 
Omegas by the Mouthful 
 
Check out the foods listed below to see which are the best 
sources of Omega-3s to help reduce inflammation. 
 
0% 50% 100%
Flounder or sole
Lobster
Cod, pacific
Tuna, yellow fin
Tuna, blue fin
Shrimp
Salmon, Atlantic, wild
Mackeral, Atlantic
Salmon, Chinook, cooked
Salmon, Atlantic, farmed
Percentage of Omega-6s vs. Omega-3s  
Assorted Fish and Seafood 
Omega 6
Omega 3
DHA or
EPA
Foods with a longer red line have larger amounts of Omega-3s.  
Fish has a greater amount of Omega-3s compared to other sources of 
meat. The goal is to consume a variety of seafood and add in lean lamb, 
grass-fed beef, and skinless white meat chicken as good protein sources 
with larger amounts of Omega-3s and lower fat intake. 
0% 50% 100%
Lamb, lean
Venison
Lamb, high fat
Beef, grass fed, lean
Chicken, white meat, skinless
Bacon
Egg White
Egg Yolk
Chicken, dark met, with skin
Beef, lean, grain-fed
Percentage of Omega-6s vs. Omega-3s  
Assorted Meat & Protein Foods  
Omega 6
Omega 3
DHA or EPA

13 
 
Most expensive 
Omega 3 Supplementation 
 
Past research has shown that Omega 3 supplementation in the 
form of EPA & DHA can improve rates of fertility and reduce 
oxidative stress as a cause of inflammation.  
 
 
Omega-3 supplementation is increasingly being prescribed to patients 
with endometriosis. Discuss with your doctor if this is right for you. 
  
 
A feasibility study was conducted on different fish oil supplements to 
compare their costs and benefits. The ProOmega liquid form is the 
best deal as it will last the longest for a total of 48 days compared to the 
others that range from 20-30 days.  
14 
 
Elimination Diet and Endometriosis 
 
To help manage painful symptoms like abdominal pain, nausea, and 
cramping that can be associated with endometriosis, certain foods can 
be eliminated from the diet that worsen these symptoms. Research has 
shown that a gluten free diet can lead to dramatic pelvic pain reduction 
in women suffering with endometriosis. These may include: 
 
1. 
Dairy contains a sugar called lactose that may be difficult for some 
women to breakdown and digest, causing cramping, diarrhea, and pain.  
 
2. Gluten is a protein found in grains and wheat products which has 
been shown to cause diarrhea, abdominal pain, and bloating in women 
with gluten sensitivity. Gluten can cause malabsorption of vitamins and  
minerals that regulate hormones. Gluten, also can cause inflammation 
and induce autoimmune reactions that attack hormones and hormone 
receptors. 
 
3. Added sugars in processed foods, such as packaged or prepared 
foods, soft drinks and baked goods, can increase inflammation.  
 
 
 
If you experience any of these symptoms, you may be a 
great candidate for the Endo Elimination Diet. Discuss with 
your doctor and dietitian to make the best plan for your 
health moving forward. 
 

15 
 
 
The Endo Elimination Diet 
 
The goal of an elimination diet is to remove all foods that could be 
linked to making your symptoms worse. There are two phases in an 
elimination diet. 
 
1. Phase 1- Elimination: Over the course of 2 weeks, you will 
remove all dairy, gluten, and added sugars and consume only the 
foods approved on pages 4-5.  
2. Phase 2 – Challenge: Over the course of 4 weeks, you will slowly 
reintroduce these foods back into the diet. You will track your 
symptoms and discuss them with your doctor and dietitian to see 
which foods your body can tolerate.  
 
How to be successful at following this diet? 
 
1. Learn more about endometriosis before starting the Endo Diet. 
These books have been recommended by the Endometriosis Association 
as great reads to provide a more comprehensive overview of 
endometriosis.  
 
 Endometriosis: The Compete Reference for Taking Charge of Your 
Health by Mary Lou Ballweg and Endometriosis Association 
 Endometriosis: A Key to Healing Through Nutrition by Dian 
Shepperson Mills, M.A., and Michael Vernon, Ph.D, HCLD 
 The Endometriosis Sourcebook: The Definitive Guide to Current 
Treatment Options, the Latest Research, Common Myths about 
the Disease, and Coping Strategies-both Physical and Emotional 
by Mary Lou Ballweg and Endometriosis Association 
Additional reference: 
 The Anti-Inflammation Diet and Recipe Book by Jessica K. Black 
 
16 
 
2. Record your current symptoms before starting the elimination 
diet. This is an essential step to help you identify what changes occur in 
your symptoms when eliminating foods from your diet. Have a 
notebook handy to write the symptoms. Keep this notebook with you at 
all times when eating to record how you react to certain foods, before, 
during, and after the elimination diet. This will help the doctor and 
dietitian better determine what the cause of your GI symptoms.  
 
 Plan your meals. Following the Endo Elimination diet can be 
difficult because you are eliminating foods that might be staples 
in your everyday diet. Therefore, plan your meals ahead of time 
to ensure that you can successfully follow the diet. Go grocery 
shopping and purchase foods on the approved foods list before 
starting your diet. Try out these food blogs for fresh, innovative 
Endo diet recipes to get you started! 
o Foodie 4 Healing 
o ENDODIET 
o Jessica Murnane  
 
 Jump right in! Follow the elimination phase for 2 weeks eating 
only the foods from the approved food lists.  (See Endometriosis 
Food  and Symptom Diary at the end of this booklet) 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
Dairy Foods 
 
Dairy Foods to Avoid  Dairy-free Alternatives to Consume 
Cow’s milk  Almond, coconut, soy, lactose-free milks   
Yogurt (all types) Lactose-free yogurt  
Cheese (all types) Dairy-free cheese, nutritional yeast  
Cottage cheese Dairy-free cottage cheese 
Sour cream Soy sour cream, nutty sour cream  
Butter  Olive oil, vegetable oil, canola oil, nut oils, 
etc.  
Margarine  Dairy-free margarine 
Condensed milk  Cream of coconut, dairy free milk powder  
Cream cheese  Coconut cream, low fat soy cream 
Coffee creamers  Dairy-free coffee creamers, soy creamers  
Ice cream Dairy-free ice cream  
Whipped cream Low fat soy cream  
Chocolate  Baking chips and bars from dairy-free 
brands like Enjoy Life Foods, Pascha 
Organic Chocolate, Taza Chocolate, 
Scharffen Berger Baking Chocolate 
 
For more recipes, grocery lists, and helpful tips on going dairy-
free, visit godairyfree.org!  
18 
 
Gluten foods to Avoid on Elimination Diet 
 
Foods with Gluten to Avoid  Gluten-free Foods to Consume 
Pastas (raviolis, dumplings, couscous, 
gnocchi) 
Gluten-free pasta 
Noodles (ramen, udon, soba, chow mein, 
egg noodles) 
Rice, cassava, quinoa, millet, 
arrowroot, amaranth, teff, 
amaranth 
Breads and pasteries (croissants, pita, naan, 
bagels, flatbreads, cornbread, potato bread, 
muffins, donuts, rolls) 
Gluten-free breads, bagels, 
muffins, rolls   
Crackers (pretzels, goldfish, graham 
crackers) 
Gluten-free crackers  
Baked goods (cakes, cookies, pie crusts, 
brownies) 
Gluten-free pastries  
Cereal and granola (corn flakes, rice puffs, 
oats) 
Gluten-free cereals  
Breakfast foods (pancakes, waffles, French 
toast, crepes, biscuits) 
Gluten-free pancakes, waffles  
Oatmeal  Gluten-free oats  
Breading and coating mixes (panko 
breadcrumbs) 
Breading made with ground up 
flax or chia seeds 
Croutons (stuffing, dressings)  Dressings made with flax or chia 
seeds  
Sauces and gravies (soy sauce, cream 
sauces)  
Sauces made with rice, soy, corn, 
potato, or bean flours  
Flour tortillas Gluten-free tortillas  
Beer, malt beverages  Gluten-free beers  
Wheat flour as an ingredient, “wheat free” 
does not mean gluten free 
Nut flours, gluten-free flours 
(rice, soy, corn, potato, bean)  
 
For more recipes, grocery lists, and tips to eating gluten-free, 
visit glutenfreeliving.com! 
19 
 
Watch out for Hidden Gluten!  
Some foods may contain hidden gluten.  
These may include: 
 
 Energy bars/granola bars – some bars may contain wheat 
as an ingredient, and most use oats that are not gluten-
free 
 French fries – be careful of batter containing wheat flour 
or cross-contamination from fryers 
 Potato chips – some potato chip seasonings may contain 
malt vinegar or wheat starch 
 Processed lunch meats 
 Candy and candy bars 
 Soup – pay special attention to cream-based soups, which 
have flour as a thickener. Many soups also contain barley 
 Multi-grain or “artisan” tortilla chips or tortillas that are 
not entirely corn-based may contain a wheat-based 
ingredient 
 Salad dressings and marinades – may contain malt 
vinegar, soy sauce, flour 
 Brown rice syrup – may be made with barley enzymes 
 Meat substitutes made with seitan (wheat gluten) such as 
vegetarian burgers, vegetarian sausage, imitation bacon, 
imitation seafood (Note: tofu is gluten-free, but be 
cautious of soy sauce marinades and cross-contamination 
when eating out, especially when the tofu is fried) 
 Soy sauce  
 Self-basting poultry 
 Pre-seasoned meats 
 Cheesecake filling – some recipes include wheat flour 
 Eggs served at restaurants – some restaurants put 
pancake batter in their scrambled eggs and omelets, but 
on their own, eggs are naturally gluten-free.  
20 
 
Watch out for Hidden Gluten!  
Some products may contain hidden gluten. These include: 
 
 Lipstick, lipgloss, lipbalm 
 Herb or nutritional supplements 
 Drugs, over-the-counter medications  
 Vitamin and mineral supplements 
 Lotions, moisturizers 
 Shampoos 
 Toothpaste  
 
The following ingredients are often code for gluten: 
 
 Avena sativa Cyclodextrin  
 Dextrin  
 Fermented grain extract  
 Hordeum distichon  
 Hordeum vulgare  
 Hydrolysate  
 Hydrolyzed malt extract  
 Hydrolyzed vegetable protein  
 Maltodextrin Phytosphingosine extract  
 Samino peptide complex  
 Secale cereale  
 Triticum aestivum  
 Triticum vulgare  
 Tocopherol/vitamin E Yeast extract  
 Natural flavoring, caramel color  
 Brown rice syrup  
 Modified food starch  
 Hydrolyzed vegetable protein (HVP)  
 Hydrolyzed soy protein 
21 
 
Read Your Labels for Gluten! 
 
 
To make sure you are not accidently ingesting gluten, be sure 
to read the label on all your food products before purchasing. 
 
Look for the words “wheat, barley, rye and oats” to identify if a 
food contains gluten. 
 
If in doubt about a food, go without consuming it just to be 
sure! 
 
 
 
 
  

22 
 
Added Sugar Foods to Avoid on Elimination 
Diet 
 
Added Sugar Foods to Avoid Foods to Consume  
Regular soft drinks, energy drinks, and 
sports drinks 
Unsweetened tea, Crystal Light, 
water  
Juice, fruit punch  100% freshly squeezed juice 
Candy, cakes, cookies, pies, cobblers Sugar-free cookies, candy 
Sweet rolls, pastries, and donuts Sugar-free rolls 
Dairy desserts, such as ice cream Frozen yogurt, plain Greek 
yogurt  
 
Reading the label on processed foods can help identify added 
sugars. The different names for sugar include:  
 
 Anhydrous dextrose 
 Brown sugar 
 Confectioner's powdered sugar 
 Corn syrup 
 Dextrose 
 Fructose 
 High-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) 
 Honey  
 Invert sugar 
 Lactose 
 Malt syrup 
 Maltose 
 Maple syrup 
 Molasses 
 Nectars (e.g., peach nectar, pear 
nectar) 
 Raw sugar 
 Sucrose 
 White granulated sugar 

23 
 
The Challenge Phase 
 
 
During this phase, you will introduce one challenge food at a 
time. Start with small portions on the first day of the challenge 
and record any symptoms in your notebook. The challenge 
phase will last 3-4 weeks, depending on the severity of your 
symptoms. 
 
 
 
Week 1: Dairy Challenge 
 Day 1: Smaller portions 
 Day 2: Larger portions 
 Record in journal 
 
Week 2: Gluten Challenge 
 Day 1: Smaller portions 
 Day 2: Larger portions 
 Record in journal 
 
Week 3: Added Sugar Challenge 
 Day 1: Smaller portions 
 Day 2: Larger portions 
 Record in journal 
 
 
 
24 
 
Now what? 
 
Interpret your results: Look at the symptoms 
recorded in your journal. What foods triggered your 
symptoms and in what amounts? What foods were safe 
for you to eat? Discuss with your dietitian about how to 
evaluate your symptoms moving forward. 
 
Change your diet: Avoid foods that trigger your 
symptoms during the challenge phases. Focus on 
consuming a well balanced diet without triggering your 
symptoms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

25 
 
The Basics of a Healthy, Well Balanced Diet 
 
Since there is no specified cause for endometriosis, it is 
important to adhere to a diet that focuses on variety and 
balance for optimal nutrition. The focus should be on 
consuming a diet balanced in all five groups, including fruits, 
vegetables, dairy, protein, and grains.  
 
 Aim for half of your plate to be filled with a variety of 
colorful fruits and vegetables. These are high in vitamins 
and antioxidants to reduce inflammation. 
 Make half your grains whole grains.  
 Vary your protein by adding in plant-based protein like 
beans and legumes to lower red meat consumption.  
 Look for food and drink sources that are lower in 
saturated fat, sodium, and added sugars.  
 Choose low-fat or fat-free dairy.  
 Incorporate healthy fats like Omega 3’s found in avocado, 
fish, nuts, and olive oil to reduce inflammation.  
 Get active at least 30 minutes a day which has been 
shown to reduce ovarian stimulation and estrogen 
production.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

26 
 
References/Websites 
 
Endometriosis (2016). Retrieved from: 
www.endometriosisassn.org/endo.html 
 
What is Endometriosis? (2016). Retrieved from: 
www.endofound.org/endometriosis
 
 
Endometriosis Foundation for America (2016). About 
Endometriosis. Retrieved from: www.endofound.org
 
 
EndoOnline (2015). What is it? Retrieved from:  
www.endometriosisassn.org/ 
 
MyPlate (2016). Retrieved from: www.choosemyplate.gov/MyPlate 
 
MyPyramid (2005). Retrieved from: 
www.cnpp.usda.gov/mypyramid
 
 
Saint Louis University Center for Endometriosis 
www.endometriosis-excision.com 
 
Gluten and Endometriosis (2016). Retrieved from: 
www.glutenfreesociety.org/gluten-and-endometriosis-is-there-a-
connection/ 
 
Sources of Gluten (2016). Retrieved from:  
www.celiac.org/live-gluten-free/glutenfreediet/sources-of-gluten/
 
 
Organic.org (2016). “The Dirty Dozen.” Retrieved from:  
www.organic.org/articles/showarticle/article-214
 
 
USDA. (2016). Organic Agriculture. Retrieved from:  
www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?contentidonly=true&
contentid=organic-agriculture.html 
  
27 
 
References/ Websites 
 
 
Weil, Dr (2015). Anti-Inflammatory Diet. Retrieved from:  
www.drweil.com/drw/u/ART02012/anti-inflammatory-diet 
 
Halpern, G., Schor, E., & Kopelman, A. (2015). Nutritional aspects 
related to endometriosis. Revista Da Associação Médica Brasileira 
(1992), 61
(6), 519-523. doi:10.1590/1806-9282.61.06.519 
 
Marziali, M., Venza, M., Lazzaro, S., Lazzaro, A., Micossi, C., & Stolfi, 
V. M. Gluten-free diet: a new strategy for management of painful 
endometriosis related symptoms? Minerva Chirurgica (2012), 67 
(6), 499-504.  
 
Parazzini, F., Viganò, P., Candiani, M., & Fedele, L. (2013). Diet and 
endometriosis risk: a literature review. Reproductive Biomedicine 
Online,26
(4), 323-336. doi:10.1016/j.rbmo.2012.12.011 
 
Qu X, Li S, Wang Z, Li M. Maternal insulin resistance causes 
oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction in mouse oocytes 
(2012). Human Reproduction 27 (7):2130-2145.doi: 
10.1093/humrep/des137 
 
Shepperson, D., Vernon, M (2002). A Key to Healing and Fertility 
through Nutrition. 
 
 
 
 
A special thank you to Anne Cameron MS, RDN for her 
dedication and assistance in development of this booklet. 
 
28 
 
 
