Source: Endometriosis UK — Diet and Complementary Therapies for Endometriosis
URL: https://www.endometriosis-uk.org/sites/default/files/2025-11/Endometriosis-CompTherapy-16pp-v4.pdf

DIET AND  
COMPLEMENTARY 
THERAPIES FOR 
ENDOMETRIOSIS 

COMPLEMENTARY THERAPIES FOR 
ENDOMETRIOSIS 
A quick Google about complementary therapies for endometriosis 
can send you down a rabbit hole of false claims and misinformation, 
so we’ve gathered the latest evidence and put it all in one place. This 
way, you can make an informed decision about what may be worth 
trying for symptom relief and what not to waste your time and money 
on. 
It should be noted that there is no cure for endometriosis and 
anything or anyone that claims to do so is making false claims. 
If you want to try one or more of the 
therapies below, you should consult 
your GP or specialist as some 
treatments or supplements 
can interfere with standard 
medical treatment or blood 
tests.
HELPING 
YOU MAKE 
AN INFORMED 
DECISION ON 
WHAT MAY HELP 
SYMPTOMS
02
DIET AND NUTRITION
You may have read that certain diets can help to manage endometriosis 
symptoms. There is little high-quality evidence for this but there is 
a growing understanding of the role of nutrition for symptom relief. 
Research is ongoing, and many people report that making changes to 
their diet helps to relieve symptoms.
For example, some people find that certain foods cause bloating or 
constipation and this can make their pain worse, particularly if they 
experience bowel symptoms from their endometriosis. It is important to 
note that what works for one person may not work for another.
Our webinar can help you to understand more about the role of nutrition: 
endometriosis-uk.org/webinar/endometriosis-and-nutrition
0303

04
CUTTING OUT GLUTEN
What is it?
Gluten is a name for the proteins found in wheat, rye and barley.
Can it help with endometriosis symptoms? 
There is no evidence for cutting out gluten completely unless you have 
coeliac disease, but some people do report benefits. If you wish to try 
cutting it out, you should do so under the supervision of a dietitian as it 
can have knock-on effects, such as putting you at risk of low fibre intake.
Some evidence suggests that eating lots of gluten (foods like bread, 
cakes, biscuits), red meat, alcohol and caffeine might affect the 
production of oestrogen, the female sex hormone which can stimulate 
endometriosis. Reducing the amount of these foods in your diet could 
potentially help with symptoms. However, more research is needed to 
establish if this is the case.
THE MEDITERRANEAN DIET
What is it? 
The Mediterranean diet is high in fruit, vegetables, beans, legumes 
such as chickpeas, wholegrains, nuts, seeds and olive oil with some 
fish and poultry. It limits red meat, sugar and alcohol as well as 
processed foods like ready meals, crisps, cakes, biscuits, bacon and 
breakfast cereals.
Can it help with endometriosis symptoms?
This is a nutrient-rich diet that limits ultra-processed foods. It’s 
recommended for us all so there is no harm at all in seeing if it 
makes a difference to endometriosis symptoms. Endometriosis is an 
inflammatory condition, so it’s thought that the anti-inflammatory 
effects of the Mediterranean diet may help reduce pain and symptom 
severity.
BOOSTING THE GUT MICROBIOME
What is it? 
The gut microbiome is the community of trillions of bacteria that live 
in your gut. It can be changed through the foods we eat and taking 
probiotic/prebiotic supplements, although there are many other 
factors that affect it. 
Can it help with endometriosis symptoms? 
Research has shown that the microbiome is 
altered in those with endometriosis and 
further research aims to look at whether 
it can be targeted for treatment and 
whether endometriosis causes the 
imbalance or the other way around. 
It is a promising area of research 
for endometriosis because having 
a heathy gut microbiome is linked 
to reduced inflammation. Eating a 
diverse, nutritious, whole-food diet 
supports a healthy gut microbiome. You 
could also try fermented foods such 
as sauerkraut, kimchi and kefir to 
introduce more friendly bacteria 
into your gut. These can all be 
found in supermarkets and 
health food shops. 
Caution should be used 
with probiotic/prebiotic 
supplements as they 
vary in quality and it’s 
not yet clear which 
types help with what 
conditions. 
06 07
EXERCISE OR PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
Can it help with endometriosis?
There is good evidence for using exercise/physical activity to manage 
pain but while there are promising small studies on exercise for 
endometriosis specifically, there is not yet any high-quality evidence. 
According to a 2024 review, numerous studies have suggested 
positive effects for people with endometriosis who 
performed exercise exclusively or alongside with 
other therapies, showing improvements in pain 
levels, quality of life, anxiety and depression. 
However, it notes, the current lack of high-
quality, robust studies is an obstacle to 
knowledge in this area. An interesting study 
is underway called the CRESCENDO 
program (inCRease physical 
Exercise and Sport to Combat 
ENDOmetriosis) so watch this 
space!
Exercise won’t do you any 
harm and it can help to boost 
mood and resilience. It can 
feel hard to motivate yourself 
if you’re in pain, so start 
with short, gentle activities 
such as swimming or walks. 
Exercise is also important as 
you age – especially during 
peri- and post-menopause 
– to help maintain muscle 
mass, regulate mood and 
maintain cardiovascular 
health. This also applies if you 
have been put into medically 
induced menopause or had a 
hysterectomy,  either with  
or without oopherectomy. 
LOW-FODMAP DIET 
What is it? 
FODMAP stands for fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, 
monosaccharides and polyols. These are known as short-chain carbohydrates 
and are poorly absorbed by the small intestine. Some people experience 
symptoms such as cramping and diarrhoea after eating them. The diet 
is a short-term intervention that involves three steps of cutting out high-
FODMAP foods such as beans, lentils, onions and garlic. Then reintroducing 
them gradually and maintaining a diet that excludes any triggers. 
Can it help with endometriosis symptoms?
If you have IBS alongside endometriosis or gastrointestinal symptoms 
similar to IBS, the low FODMAP diet may offer some relief from symptoms. 
However, there is no evidence for this diet in relation to endometriosis 
specifically. If you try it for symptom relief or to see what you might be 
reacting to, it should be done under the guidance of a registered dietitian. 
Cutting out foods and then reintroducing them needs to be done carefully 
as excluding foods groups can result in greater sensitivity to them when you 
reintroduce them and also affect the balance of the microbiome. 
THE AUTOIMMUNE PROTOCOL (AIP) DIET
What is it? 
The AIP diet is an elimination diet that’s designed to lower inflammation 
in people with autoimmune disorders such as Crohn’s disease. Initially, 
you eliminate a large number of food groups and drinks such as dairy, 
grains, nightshade vegetables, eggs, coffee and alcohol. Then only eat 
permitted foods such as fruit, vegetables, meat, fermented foods and 
bone broth for a month or longer. You then slowly reintroduce some of 
the foods you’ve cut out to see what causes a reaction and then stay in a 
maintenance phase of avoiding foods that cause you a problem. 
Can it help with endometriosis symptoms? 
There is no evidence that the AIP diet can help with endometriosis. 
Those who promote it online sometimes hail it as a cure but be 
reassured that this is not the ‘cure you don’t know about’. We do not 
recommend trying this diet. It  may bring temporary symptom relief but 
it’s very restrictive and hard to adhere to in the long-term. 
08
PELVIC HEALTH PHYSIOTHERAPY
What is it? 
A specialist branch of physiotherapy (physio) that helps to improve 
the function of the pelvic floor – a bowl-shaped group of muscles, 
ligaments, nerves and fascia - connective tissue that surrounds 
organs, blood vessels, bones, nerve fibres, and muscles. 
Women and those assigned female at birth with endometriosis can 
experience symptoms such as:
• Overactive, shortened and tight pelvic-floor muscles
• Painful bladder and bowel movements
• Pain during/after sex
After a thorough assessment, pelvic health physiotherapists aims 
to treat symptoms through exercises, advice, and relaxation and 
breathing techniques. It can also involve manual therapy.
It’s important to note that the treatment will not cause you more pain 
and it does not have to be internal. 
Can it help with endometriosis symptoms?
Yes. It’s an evidence-based, proven treatment 
used in specialist endometriosis clinics. You can 
be referred by your GP or specialist, or see a 
private physiotherapist. Ensure that they are a 
specialist pelvic health physiotherapist with 
endometriosis experience and registered with 
the Pelvic, Obstetric and Gynaecological 
Physiotherapy Organisation: thepogp.co.uk
For more information, watch our 
webinar on pelvic health physiotherapy: 
endometriosis-uk.org/webinar/practical-
pain-management-physiotherapy-and-
endometriosis.
09
ACUPUNCTURE
What is it? 
A treatment derived from Traditional Chinese Medicine in which fine 
needles are inserted into the body to stimulate it and left there during the 
treatment session. You may feel a slight sensation as the needle goes in 
but it’s not a painful treatment. 
Can it help with endometriosis symptoms? 
There is some evidence that it may help with endometriosis pain but the 
studies so far are small. For example, a 2023 review of six studies found 
that acupuncture treatment for endometriosis ‘demonstrated clinically 
relevant improvements in pelvic pain and should be considered as a 
potential treatment intervention’.
A small 2023 trial on 106 women found that ‘acupuncture is an effective 
and safe method of relieving dysmenorrhea [period pain], shortening 
the pain duration, and improving wellbeing and quality of life in women 
with endometriosis-associated pain. Although the benefits fade after 
treatment is discontinued’. 
Larger, higher quality studies 
are needed to establish the 
benefits of acupuncture for 
endometriosis. 
If you decide to try it, find 
a registered practitioner 
that specialises in pelvic 
acupuncture: acupuncture.org.
uk/find-an-acupuncturist/
“A SMALL TRIAL OF 
106 WOMEN FOUND 
THAT ACUPUNCTURE 
IS AN EFFECTIVE AND 
SAFE METHOD OF 
RELIEVING PERIOD 
PAIN”
010
What is it? 
A mind and body practice consisting of physical postures (asanas) 
and a focus on the breath (pranayama). There are many kinds of 
yoga, some more physically demanding than others. You don’t have 
to be super-fit or flexible to try yoga. Look for a beginner’s class or 
chair-based yoga where the postures are supported. Another option 
is Yoga nidra, a guided meditation lying on the floor that helps the 
nervous system to achieve deep rest. 
Can it help with endometriosis symptoms? 
There is evidence that yoga helps to relieve period pain. 
For example, a 2023 review concluded that: ‘studies 
demonstrated a significant relief in dysmenorrhea 
(period pain) among those who practiced yoga with 
improved pain tolerance and reduced stress levels’. 
The evidence is limited for endometriosis 
specifically, but it’s a growing area of interest. 
For example, a small study found that eight 
weeks of Hatha yoga practice twice a week 
was associated with a reduction in levels of 
chronic pelvic pain, and an improvement 
in quality of life in women with 
endometriosis. And a small 2023 pilot 
study on 42 women who did eight 
weeks of endometriosis yoga 
classes found benefits, with the 
authors concluding that, ‘the 
practice of endometriosis 
yoga is recommended for 
women with endometriosis 
to reduce levels of pain 
and stress, and to improve 
quality of life’.  
YOGA
011
CHINESE HERBAL MEDICINE 
What is it? Part of Traditional Chinese Medicine, practitioners 
dispense herbal preparations for a variety of ailments. 
Can it help with endometriosis symptoms?
Some small, low-quality studies have shown benefit for various 
aspects of endometriosis, but nothing that would warrant 
recommending it as a treatment, either alone or alongside standard 
treatment. However, some people report symptom relief. If you wish 
to try it, it’s essential that you tell your GP or endometriosis prescriber 
what you’re taking as it may dangerously interact with standard 
medications or treatments. 
To find a registered practitioner visit: atcm.co.uk
 ‘THE PRACTICE OF 
ENDOMETRIOSIS YOGA 
IS RECOMMENDED 
FOR WOMEN WITH 
ENDOMETRIOSIS TO 
REDUCE LEVELS OF PAIN 
AND STRESS, AND TO 
IMPROVE QUALITY OF LIFE’.  
012
COGNITIVE BEHAVIOURAL THERAPY 
(CBT)
CBT is a type of talking therapy that aims to improve wellbeing and 
quality of life. For pain management, it considers that emotional factors 
such as stress, depression and anxiety can affect how we perceive 
physical pain and how we respond to it. It helps to address these by 
equipping you with coping strategies.
It also addresses negative thought patterns around pain by giving 
you ways to change/replace them over time. This is called cognitive 
restructuring. 
Can it help with endometriosis symptoms? 
There is good evidence for chronic pain, but not specifically for 
endometriosis. A 2022 review of the evidence found that 
research in this area is promising but not yet high quality.
However, a 2024 review on CBT for adolescents 
states that, ‘CBT is widely regarded as the leading 
non-pharmacological treatment for chronic 
pain [in adults], encompassing gynaecological 
conditions associated with chronic pelvic pain, 
such as endometriosis’. 
Research is ongoing and will hopefully become 
higher quality. If you want to try CBT, find a 
registered practitioner at: cbtregisteruk.com
“CBT IS WIDELY  
REGARDED AS THE LEADING 
NON-PHARMACEUTICAL 
TREATMENT FOR CHRONIC 
PAIN”
013
What is it? 
Mindfulness is a relaxation technique in which you focus on being 
present in your body and surroundings, noticing your thoughts, how 
you feel and what you can see and hear. It can be used in different 
ways, such as meditation. 
Can it help with endometriosis symptoms? 
There is some low-quality evidence that mindfulness can help to 
manage pain from endometriosis. For example, a small 2022 pilot study 
found that a brief mindfulness-based intervention on women with deep 
endometriosis found that it significantly reduced pain unpleasantness, 
pelvic pain and pain, difficulty during bowel movements, and decreased 
all endometriosis-related pain at follow-up.
And a 2024 study on endometriosis-related pain found that a brief 
mindfulness-based intervention reduced sensory pain and psychological 
stress, and it was these in combination that improved women’s vitality. 
If you try a mindfulness-based practice, try to commit to it for at least 
a month to give it a chance to work. Research found that it took four 
weeks for meditation to become effective for endometriosis pain.
MINDFULNESS
A 2024 STUDY ON ENDOMETRIOSIS-
RELATED PAIN FOUND THAT A 
BRIEF MINDFULNESS-BASED 
INTERVENTION REDUCED SENSORY 
PAIN AND PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESS
14
NURSE-LED SUPPORT LINE:  
ENDOMETRIOSIS-UK.ORG/NURSE-SUPPORT
VOLUNTEER PEER SUPPORT HELPLINE: 
0808 808 2227
ENDOMETRIOSIS-UK.ORG
FURTHER SUPPORT  
AND INFORMATION
REFERENCES
DIET
Gluten:
https:/ /pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10507348/
Microbiome: 
https:/ /pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6379373/
https:/ /pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9729346/#:~:text=Bulent%20et%20al.,increased%20
in%20patients%20with%20endometriosis
FODMAP: 
https:/ /www.monashfodmap.com/blog/endometriosis-and-ibs/
No evidence for AIP and endo: 
https:/ /pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10507348/
EXERCISE
Exercise and pain: https:/ /pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5491894/#:~:tex-
t=Further%20regular%20exercise%20reduces%20serotonin,1
https:/ /bmcwomenshealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s12905-021-
01500-4
2024 review: https:/ /pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38916808/
CRESCENDO: https:/ /pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38012776/
ACUPUNCTURE
Small study on dysmenorrhoea:
https:/ /pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36716811/
2023 review: https:/ /www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
S2213422023000823
YOGA
Hatha yoga study: https:/ /pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/27869485/
Endo yoga pilot study: https:/ /pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.
gov/35839113/
CBT
Well evidenced for chronic pain: https:/ /psycnet.apa.org/
doiLanding?doi=10.1037%2Fa0035747
2022 review: https:/ /pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35576938/
2024 review on adolescents: https:/ /www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S1077722924000300
MINDFULNESS
https:/ /onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ejp.1939
Meditation and pain/stress reduction: https:/ /link.springer.com/
article/10.1007/s00737-023-01381-6
Meditation - four weeks to become effective: https:/ /link.springer.
com/article/10.1007/s12671-024-02381-y?fromPaywallRec=true
Endometriosis UK is a registered charity in England and Wales (1035810) and in Scotland  (SC051651)
     Visit www.endometriosis-uk.org 
     Helpline: 0808 808 2227